well good evening ladies and gentlemen
please take your seats a very warm
welcome to this special evening how to
Academy my name is matthew dainko now
I'm editor-in-chief of drugstore culture
and new culture and politics magazine do
visit us at www.expressoil.com and he
has which is going to talk about tonight
the format of the evening is he will
speak for about 15 minutes he and I will
have a chat and then probably an
opportunity for you all to ask him
questions he's a man who really needs
little introduction he's a professor at
Stanford University
he's been world-famous sinces
extraordinarily successful book the end
of history and numerous books since come
out trust the political order and
political decay the origins of political
order and many others he is a force in
political ideas and there is no one else
like him please join me in welcoming
Francis Fukuyama
so Matthew thank you very much for that
very kind introduction it's a delight to
be here in London thanks to all of you
for coming out we in California aren't
used to this kind of weather so I you
know for me it would would have been a
big sacrifice so I appreciate that I'm
gonna talk about this question of
identity which I think actually goes
deeper than what we refer to as identity
politics in the current debate the
reason that I chose this topic I was
actually diverted from my normal
research agenda really by the elections
of 2016 that brought Britain out of the
EU and Donald Trump into the White House
I think that this constitutes a threat
to liberal democracy not to democracy as
such these were the results of
legitimate elections but the result of
putting someone like Donald Trump in
office I think is to threaten in a way
the institutional order of a properly
working liberal democracy I think this
is part of a larger trend in world
politics that involves people like
Victor Orbin and Hungary
the Law and Justice Party in Poland
president air Dewan and Turkey in all of
these cases you have democratically
elected leaders that are using their
democratic legitimacy to attack the
checks and balances that are important
parts of a properly functioning
constitutional order because they
believe that they have a kind of
charismatic Authority that is inherited
from their direct relationship to the
people and I think it might particular
in my own country I think this is
embodied in Trump's attack on the FBI on
the Justice Department on the Mueller
investigation as well as on the
mainstream media which he's called the
enemy of the American people and so this
is a kind of demagogic language that
again does not threaten democracy as
such it threatens the liberal part of
liberal democracy the rule of law and
the constitutional
order and I think this is going on
already in Europe in Hungary and Poland
there are parties like this nipping at
the heels of the mainstream parties in
Germany and France in many other places
so that's kind of the crisis of
democracy I wanted to understand what
was leading to this I think the
conventional wisdom had to do with
economics globalization as we are now I
think quite aware globalization left a
lot of losers people that had suffered
job loss from deindustrialization the
moving of manufacturing to Asia and to
other parts of the developing world but
I think that this to me misses an
important dimension of what's been going
on if it had been the case that that the
increasingly unequal global order that
has left a narrow band of oligarchs in
every country and then the 99% that are
doing much less well if that had been
the only issue going on then left-wing
parties should have been the inheritors
of the populist energy that flowed out
of the financial crisis in 2008 or the
euro crisis in 2010 instead it's been
right-wing anti-immigrant populist
parties that have gained power they're
the ones that have gotten the energy and
I think it's really because of this
issue of identity it's really not simply
economic displacement it is also
cultural displacement that's driving
people now I have a very specific
definition of identity you know identity
is what's on your driver's license
that's one version of it but I think
that identity in the political sense has
several different sources one of them is
a universal psychological characteristic
which the Greeks called sumos which
means spiritedness it's the part of the
human psyche that demands respect and
dignity a recognition of one's dignity
and it's kind of an inherently political
tendency because it's not just enough to
feel self-esteem you don't
skills self-esteem unless other people
properly esteem you and in the modern
world it takes the form of a belief that
I have an inner self that sometimes may
be deeply buried and it is not being
respected it is being ignored or
actively disrespected I think that this
is actually one of the drivers of modern
politics it's actually at the source of
many of the political movements that we
see around us including liberal
democracy itself so in Tunisia Mohamed
Bouazizi in 2011 set himself on fire
because he had his livelihood
confiscated by the Tunisian dictatorship
he could not get an answer as to where
his vegetable cart had gone and
therefore he doused himself with
gasoline set himself on fire and his
self immolation sparked the Arab Spring
in every Arab country people understood
his his agony that they were living
under dictatorships that did not take
him seriously as a human being and this
is what led to the downfall of Mubarak
of the Ben Ali regime of Muammar Qaddafi
and the like now it went bad in the long
run but this is the basis I think of all
movements against dictatorship they do
not recognize their citizens as human
beings on the other hand a democracy a
properly functioning democracy does that
by giving people rights to speech to
Association to belief and ultimately to
political participation and you can
weave a similar story in Ukraine and
Georgia and other places that had
experienced Democratic revolutions in
other forms it can take the form of
nationalism kind of the evil twin of
liberal democracy where the group that
needs recognition is a cultural group
usually bound by language or common
history that wants to have its own
political community that's really what
lay at the origins of the world wars in
the first half of the 20th century and
this is a case where the demand for
equal respect moves over into the demand
for superior respect very easily and
this is one of the problems with this
kind of dignity this kind of dignity
politics now to get us to the present I
think you have to look a little bit at
the the genealogy of what we actually
call identity politics in the present I
believe that it really starts on the
left rather than the right it starts in
the 1960s with the emergence of
different social movements on behalf of
racial minorities women gays and
lesbians the disabled you know there are
many groups in mainstream European North
American societies that were not
respected they were ignored at best and
actively discriminated against by the
mainstream society which was largely
white and male and as a result they were
pushing back and they were seeking
social justice so this was a perfectly
legitimate part of being included in a
liberal order but it had this effect on
our politics where the parties of the
left which during most of the 20th
century had focused on the working class
most of which was white in Europe in the
United States increasingly began to
understand marginalization not as this
broad working class but the specific
groups identity groups that had been
victimized in you know in particular
ways and one of the things that's gone
on in virtually every advanced country
is that the left has lost ground and so
this gets back to this explanation of
why is it after the financial crisis
that it was the the right that that
profited and not the left and I think
part of the reason is that the left
increasingly lost touch with these
mainstream white voters that had been
the basis of their their core support
during much of the 20th century because
of this shift in the left understanding
of identity
now the
current moment is I think particularly
fraught because we have now seen the
adoption of this identity framing by
people on the right now of course
there's always been racism and
xenophobia in in societies this is not
something new but the way that a lot of
right-wing identity groups frame their
their problem is borrowed from the left
so now you get like white nationalists
that say we as white people are an
oppressed minority we are the ones that
are being victimized we're being
victimized by the preferential treatment
given to you know minorities to women to
refugees to immigrants and we simply
need to reclaim our equal rights this is
of course been embedded by politicians
that see that you know this stoking this
kind of anger is their route to power
but I think it's very important to note
that there is a core of truth in that
assertion if you think about the
situation of a lot of white
working-class people over the last
generation it has not been good they've
lost jobs they've lost income for
roughly half of Americans they are
either making no more money in real
terms or are actually poorer than they
were in the year 2000 so eighteen years
have passed with no gains to income a
lot of the communities are falling apart
single-parent families high prime rates
drug use in the United States we have a
very large opioid crisis and I think a
lot of the people in that group feel
that the elites meaning the two
political parties in the United States
but here it could be the you know the
two dominant parties in Britain simply
we're not paying any attention to them
did not have an agenda that would
address their specific questions their
their specific concerns and in general
you know look down upon them with
something like contempt certainly the
cultural elites
I think we're quite guilty of that and
so this is what's led to the current
situation where instead of a politics
that has been divided between a left and
right defined by their attitudes towards
the free market or towards
redistribution to social protections to
economic regulation we now have a
politics that is increasingly based on
fixed identities and I think this is not
good for democracy in the United States
we are rapidly moving to a point where
the Republican Party is basically the
party of white people and where the
Democratic Party is the party of
minorities and women and the problem
with that in the democracy other than
that it creates this incredible
polarization on the two sides of this
divide is that you know the the these
are fixed identities that you are born
with and it makes rigid your attitude
towards politics towards culture and in
the United States unfortunately it's
seeping down into you know the very
personal relationships between people
that had been friends or you know at
least could agree to disagree on
political matters and it's led to an
extremely dysfunctional politics I think
something similar has taken place as a
result of the brexit vote that has
created this completely new division in
British politics that had not existed
before and it's led to an emotional
investment in demonizing you know the
other side that is also not healthy for
politics now when Matthew comes back on
I think we'll have plenty of time to
discuss you know potential solutions to
this I would I guess like to leave you
with a little bit of a hopeful
observation which is that identity can
correspond to culture but it's not the
same thing as a long-standing you know
culture where people have believed the
same thing for you know hundreds of
years identity is inherently plastic it
can be shaped by human actors
it has been deliberately sliced and
diced into narrow identities over the
past generation there's a certain
dynamic and analogic to that but it can
also be made bigger and I think that in
a sense if you're going to have a
successful democracy you have to worry
about something like national identity I
think for better or worse it's the
nation-state that is the locus of our
politics because that's the unit that
deploys power you cannot have legitimate
power without a nation-state and
therefore our politics has to revolve
around democratic processes to
legitimate and use and control that
power and you cannot have a democracy
you cannot have a democracy if you do
not have a common national identity
meaning an identity where you agree on
basic principles of the legitimacy of
institutions that allow you to
deliberate and to come to collective
decisions I think that nationalism has
gotten has given national identity a bad
name because it does often times tend to
become aggressive but it need not it can
be a creedal identity or a civic
identity in which your identity is not
based on your race or your ethnicity
it's really based on a commonly shared
set of ideas in the United States I
thought we had gotten to that point by
the end of the civil rights era where
being an American meant belief in the
Constitution and the rule of law
principle of human equality and that's
really now what's under threat I think
it's under threat primarily at the
moment from the right by people that
would like to drag us back into an
ethnic understanding of what identity is
now there's other things in terms of
public policy that I think we can do but
maybe at this point I'll leave it at
that and I'll look forward to the to the
discussion and then to your questions
thank you very much
well thank you very much Frances and so
much to chew on there I just to return
briefly to as it were the the whole
question of how we got to where we are
liberal individualism and the kind of
tension between citizenship and
consumerism seems to me at least in part
of given way to a kind of group
mentality why is that why is that so so
I think that this is one of the big
problems in a liberal democracy liberal
democracies by a definition do not tell
you how to live you know that's really
the the good life is something that's
left up to private choice and to private
individuals it gives us a great deal of
freedom but a lot of times we actually
don't want that freedom because we want
shared values we want community we want
you know connection to other people
other cultures have much more tightly
bound you know communities in a liberal
society we don't have that what we have
is a lot of peace and prosperity which
is great if you don't have peace and
prosperity but if you start taking it
for granted you begin to want other
things you know and particularly and and
and I guess the other thing to say is
that there's no liberal society in
existence that has actually lived up to
its own ideals in terms of treating its
own citizens or citizens treating each
other with the kind of equal respect
that you know they are theoretically do
and so I think that creates the grounds
for people saying actually I don't want
to just have complete freedom of choice
and you know lots of stuff that I can
buy in the Walmart or the IKEA I
actually want you know human connections
with other people and I want you know my
connection with them to be recognized by
you know by others and so that leaves I
think you know it's it's this new most
that I was talking about that leads
people back into politics to want
something one thing that I think really
quite interesting is in Eastern Europe
so polling if you look at Poland
and now has one of these populist
anti-immigrant parties a law and justice
party and it was the most successful
country in the European Union for the
ten years prior to the rise of this
party so you say well what you know what
could possibly make them this angry and
I think part of it is just the fact that
the majority of Polish voters these days
actually were born after the fall of
communism they don't have a memory of
what a real dictatorship was like unlike
their parents generation they could take
peace and prosperity for granted and
then they could focus on other issues
like you know the tyranny of Brussels
over you know and I mean because they in
a sense they haven't experienced realtor
knee in their own country so I think you
know all of these are contributing
factors that lead people to want forms
of recognition other than the universal
recognition that a liberal democracy
owes all of its citizens because the
liberal mindset is not only happy with
but invites complexity of identity the
multi-layered identity and is there a
sense in which that extremely complex
disaggregation that modernity is brought
about has encouraged people to kind of
recoil a little and to seek tribes and
groups using often digital technology
where perhaps they might not have done
so much in the past no I think
absolutely I mean I think actually the
technology has abetted this search for
identity because it actually makes the
process a lot easier right so if you
were living you know in the 1950s and
sitting around you know a pub or a
coffee shop and you have some crackpot
theory about you know what the
government was doing you probably
couldn't find more than one or two other
people that you could talk to whereas
today on the internet you know you can
find 10,000 other crackpots that believe
exactly you know your particular
conspiracy theory and that reinforces
your view that actually there is a
conspiracy because you know all around
me nobody wants to admit this but in
you know here on the Internet I see that
you know there's a lot of people who are
like-minded and so it you know it allows
you to specialize and compartmentalize
and wall yourself off from other kinds
of information that that you don't want
I think you know we were discussing a
little bit earlier I'd have it has a lot
of other impacts you know as well in
terms of people's trust in basic
information and things of that sort that
I think have also contributed to this
problem
because one of the things that seems to
me to have run through your work going
back to the end of history in fact is
it's a interest in dignity and one of
the common factors in politics in the
last 40 years has been a tremendous
emphasis upon socioeconomic status and
economic prosperity and so on and almost
a sense that economic prosperity and
liberalism were inevitable handmade they
work together have we really lost I mean
what is one of the problems here that we
lost sight in our politics of the need
for dignity that we always assume in a
way adopted a kind of materialist
approach to history and and didn't think
hard enough about the importance of
dignity alongside that I think those two
are actually related in a lot of ways
because what a job or what wealth convey
to people past a certain subsistence
level of existence is actually dignity
right that I have a job which means that
society values me enough to pay me a
wage in return for what for what I do
the other aspect of dignity that that
comes into play is that status is
oftentimes a relative thing so that no
matter what your absolute level of
wealth or income or you know how many
cars you have if there's people that you
see around you that have you know
clearly more than you feel bad and I
think that's what propels you know a
quest for status and in certain sense in
a capitalist society you're never sad
with with what you have even though
you're living at a material level of
wealth that for you know impoverished
people in the developing world would be
you know a miracle if they could you
know if they could get there and I think
that that's you know also what's driving
a lot of the unhappiness is this
perceived well it's not just perceived I
mean there's a reality every country
around the world has developed a class
of oligarchs you know the economic
growth and there's been a huge amount of
economic growth over the past thirty
forty years really has gone to a pretty
narrow slice of you know the population
and they live in a way that you know
scarcely comprehensible to you know the
people that haven't benefited in that
sense and I think that also has
contributed to the sense of resentment
and anger is that which raises an
interesting question which is does
liberalism have kind of conditions
attached to it in the sense that if that
income if that gap in the distribution
of wealth becomes so great
does liberalism start to bend and fray
well of course I mean I think that's why
we want liberal democracy yeah you know
I mean pure liberalism of the sort that
Britain you know practiced in the first
part of the 19th century produces
gigantic inequalities if you simply have
a market economy with no state sitting
over it to equalize outcomes to some
extent you're going to end up with these
inequalities and you're going to end up
with social discord because people
really don't like that and so I think
the modern solution has always been a
market economy attached to a
fundamentally Democratic political order
in which ordinary people were not given
necessarily an equal share of income or
wealth but they were given an equal
political voice that then would allow
them to you know elect the Labour Party
after World War two that you know then
put into place you know the modern
welfare state and so forth the problem I
think now is that you have political
decay meaning that a lot of the elites
have gamed the system to the
point where it's no longer a level
playing field and they can capture parts
of the state and make it work for them
they can exempt themselves from taxation
they can get away with not providing
basic social services as long as they're
taken care of this sort of thing and I
think that is that perception has you
know a lot of reality to it and that
again contributes to the sense of
unfairness in the way that the system
has so in other words you need liberal
democracy but the democracy part I don't
think has been actually working all that
well because if you were to look ahead
at the sort of available mechanisms to
write that perceived wrong the problem
of inequality those mechanisms are not
conspicuously present are them we've got
the juggernaut of automation coming
towards us big tech corporations that
have as much if not more power as many
nation states how do how does one go
about restoring and restoring the grip
of democracy upon the economy well the
the automation problem I really don't
know what the answer is I mean another
book yeah it's you know in that's a
situation where I actually you know if
you look at the current debate over that
although there's some empirical
disagreement about how big a problem its
it is you know I think everybody
recognizes that that's really one of the
chief threats in the future and I think
a lot of the answers that are being put
forward like universal basic income or
just more education I've got a lot of
problems with them and so I I'm gonna
duck you know answering that be honest
yeah the other part of it is just as a
political issue you know how do you get
Facebook and Google and Microsoft in
these gigantic tech companies for
example to behave in a pro-social way
rather than in a destructive way well
that's a matter of political power
actually as an American I'm actually
glad that you've got the European Union
that's coming down on them like a ton of
bricks because in our political system
we're not willing to you know we're not
willing to do that because we just
government and and so forth but I think
it's just like any other political
mobilization you got to get first of all
you got to convince the troops that this
is something necessary you have to have
grassroots mobilization you have to have
a workable gameplan and you have to have
a certain amount of leadership but in
the end you know if you have determined
political majorities in your political
sphere you know even these big economic
powers are going to have to you know
give in to the power of a state that
Scott consensus the problem you know is
that we don't have the consensus right
now and so the the question for
political leadership is how do you get
it and how do you mobilize people so
let's talk a little bit about some of
the potential solutions you talked in
you mentioned in your talk and and you
talk great the rights and great lengths
and fascinatingly about or you call
creedal national identities can you
elaborate on that very interesting idea
yeah well you know I can explain it best
by just a little history lesson so in
the United States after the signing of
the Constitution up until the Civil War
you did not have a creedal national
identity you had an identity that was
basically based on race and also gender
so that only white men initially only
white men with property were allowed to
be citizens were regarded as full human
beings and in some I think deep sense
the civil war in the 1860s was fought
over the question of American national
identity were black people actually part
of this political community where they
considered human beings the North won
the war at the cost of 600,000 lives a
very bloody conflict and in the wake of
it you passed the 13th 14th and 15th
amendments 13th amendment abolished
slavery the 14th amendment extended due
process to all Americans and the 15th
amendment guaranteed voting rights it
takes another hundred years until the
civil rights movement in the 1960s
until the promise of what Abraham
Lincoln had called a new birth of
freedom is actually realized for for
black people in the United States it
takes until you know second decade of
the 20th century for women to be
included in that you know in that circle
but I think that by the time you get to
the 1960s it does become possible to say
that you know an American is somebody
who believes in a certain set of basic
you know democratic values
that's the qualification for joining
that community and it's no longer based
on these characteristics like your race
or ethnicity so that's what it is meant
by a creedal identity and I think that's
what's really that threat right now and
in the States is you imply there's the
Constitution the Pledge of Allegiance
there are a whole manner of structural
institutions and practices that
conventions that or enforce that creedal
national identity in this country which
know Europe you Europe in a frequent
visitor to know well have many friends
here it's less obvious I mean
traditionally people spoke of
institutions then they start like the
monarchy Parliament latterly the BBC the
NHS there's been a great crash of trust
in many of those institutions and it
we're now going through what might
politely be called a bit of a sticky
patch with Greg said very politely so
give us some hope what what what would
be the Fukuyama creedal national
identity for Britain for 2019 onwards
well I think that for any developed
democracy it's got to revolve around
basically these I Enlightenment ideas
about you know constitutional democracy
just because you don't have a written
constitution doesn't mean you don't have
a constitution you have certain
historical traditions of you know
British Liberty that I think are at the
basis of what you know makes this
country what it is and distinct
is it from countries that don't enjoy
that kind of Liberty you know freedom of
speech freedom of the press all of these
I think are constitutive of the way that
this political community has understood
itself and so I think those would be
components of citizenship I think that
this country has a much in a way a much
easier problem in defining that kind of
a democratic identity than a lot of
countries on the continent because in
many member states of the EU citizenship
for example is still restricted by
ethnicity you can't actually and and
it's it's also a cultural thing so you
know if you're a second or third
generation children of Pakistani
immigrants you can still say I'm British
and in a way you know the very term
British was meant to overcome the
interior you know the the existing
divisions between scotch-irish
you know English and so forth so it's a
it's a broad inclusive concept of
citizenship and so if your Pakistani of
origin you can still say I'm a British
citizen I you know participate in those
British traditions it's not that easy to
do that in in you know Denmark or in
Germany where citizenship is really
linked to ethnicity and so if you're a
you know a Turk that doesn't speak any
Turkish because you were born and raised
in Germany it's still difficult for you
to say I'm a I'm a German because you
know people look at you a little bit
funny so while you're actually not a
German you know so I think that that's
kind of the task that is in front of a
lot of countries in Europe is first of
all to try to establish some common
ground for citizenship and for inclusion
in the national community that is
meaningful is democratic is based on
these Enlightenment values and then to
regard the job of dealing with
immigrants not as keeping them out but
actually of assimilating or integrating
them to that to that set of values
well assimilation integration aren't the
same are they let's talk about that a
bit I mean what
how far does integration have to go
because obviously there's a huge debate
not confined to this country about as it
were what how big that what Hamas would
called the public sphere has to be
mm-hmm
is it just payment of taxes obedience to
the law or is it more than that is it
obedience to hope or involvement in a
series of pressure of conventional
practices so religious freedom has
become a massive issue in this country
which is how are there areas where
religious freedom crosses swords with
the rights of women and so on yeah and
you have an endless stream of
incommensurable values here how do you
resolve those kind of conflict well on
the incommensurable values I think that
one of the things you actually have to
focus on is that there are certain core
values in a liberal democracy that you
really should not abridge in the name of
cultural tolerance right so again I mean
this is a you know sort of classic case
where you have a family that wants to
send their daughter you know back to the
country of origin for an arranged
marriage because that's the cultural
tradition and that in that society I
think that that is incompatible with
basic liberal values having to do with
individual equality and individual
agency you know in a liberal society we
believe that women should have control
over these big choices in life about who
they marry and so forth and so I think
that one of the mistakes that's been
made by this wrong interpretation of
multiculturalism is to not understand
that there is actually a set of
necessary values that underlie a modern
liberal democracy and that in that
respect not all cultures are actually
equal and that you do have to make some
some choices in favor of the ones that
really you know are organic here to your
political order now it's a complicated
issue about how much how much glue there
is in a society so in the United States
we've got this big problem that we have
a ver
thin culture right you know you take a
gay waiter in San Francisco with all the
earrings and tattoos and you compare
that person to a you know to an oil rig
worker in Louisiana you know they don't
eat the same food they don't have the
same religion they don't you know like
the same sports you know there's very
little that ties them together because
the country is so diverse and so our
problem is I think actually creating a
somewhat thicker culture that would bind
us together so this is why I actually
like the idea of national service
because if you give people common
experiences it may you know thicken the
ties that they have with one another in
a lot of Europe the problem is just the
opposite that they've got thick cultures
already that's based on religion on
ethnicity on food on a lot of traditions
that are very very deeply embedded that
a lot of newcomers aren't going to share
and so they do have to peel away you
know the ones that are real obstacles to
accepting outsiders but keep ones that
are you know actually transmissible and
open to you know to people that come
from different places has the
left-of-center become too preoccupied by
the problem of offense and you're not
open enough to the contest of ideas well
I would say they have indulged a certain
kind of dignity politics where you know
they worry tremendously about the
dignity of you know particular groups
and that ground is shifting constantly
and you can kind of see this in the
evolution of things like gender pronouns
so used to be that people thought they
were just men and women but then they're
trans people and then there's you know
people of you know kind of intermediate
genders that are neither you know the
first three and you get this constant
proliferation but then a lot of
indignation when you do not recognize
the dignity of the
groups that you know nobody had actually
even seen as distinct you know objects
of discrimination and so forth and so I
think that that has you know shifted the
focus and and it's actually had this
effect of alienating I think a lot of
the mainstream people that say okay you
know fine I I want to be tolerant and so
forth but I don't really understand this
new world where we have to be super
sensitive and so this again has played
directly into politics so why did a lot
of people vote for Donald Trump he
insults Mexicans he insults women or he
assaults women he mocks a disabled
reporter they actually voted for him
because he did those things you know
because he wasn't subject to this kind
of pervasive political correctness and I
think you know he was practicing a kind
of politics of authenticity because you
know in his tweeting everybody thinks I
mean nobody could have made up that
tweet that he just you know sent off
this morning it has to be the real
Donald so his own parody account yeah
but that in itself is alarming isn't it
because it suggests that the the public
discourse has reached a point where you
have on the one hand a kind of nativist
my Sajha mystic discourse and on the
other a discourse that's that's trying
to that is so timid and so nervous are
causing a fence that it's saying
practically nothing mm-hmm so how do you
again the question comes back to how do
you assure people back into the public
sphere to talk to each other in civil
civil ways I think you need to draw
different kinds of boundaries or around
acceptable discourse so I think you know
some of the rules of political
correctness really do need to be relaxed
a little bit and where that relaxation
occurs is you know is crumpled I mean so
you see this very much in the use of the
term racism I think that that term
is overused by many people on the left
to denounce behaviors that oftentimes
are actually not you know I mean they're
they're different forms that racism can
take and it's one that's used a little
bit to expansively so everybody that
points out a cultural difference between
different ethnic groups is not there by
a racist you know simply to acknowledge
the fact that you know certain groups
have certain you know characteristics do
better in school you know this sort of
thing so I think we need to you know in
a way kind of relaxed a little bit about
that that rhetoric but then we have to
recognize that there are these people
that really are racists you know and are
introducing a much much uglier kind of
discourse into you know what is
acceptable speech so this is you know I
mean I I know this is a kind of mushy
answer but but I do think that you know
on both sides we need to readjust the
boundaries how much of this the Liberals
have to own I mean just an extent you
know the liberal moment has if not
passed certainly come to a you know a
very very big climacteric and a lot of
liberals feel that there's no there's no
way back and that they have to they're
in a kind of cringe position so what
bits of liberalism can be protected
defended and how does it have to adapt
to this new situation well I think you
actually need to think about this
politically because you need to in a
democracy you're not going to ever get
your full agenda you know that's not
what happens in a democracy you're
you're gonna have to make compromises so
you have to decide on what elements of
your agenda you're you know you're
willing to to make it a deal on let me
just give you an example with with the
regard to immigration and and it gets
back to this point about racism so not
everybody that is worried about the
current immigration regime either in
Europe or in the United States as a
racist it's it's simply not true there
are other I think legitimate reasons for
worrying about the current regime so one
of them is
the fact that a lot of immigration is
illegal right people think there's a
rule of law we have rules and we ought
to enforce those rules and that I think
is a reasonable worry another worry is
will an immigrant actually assimilate or
integrate into our you know our culture
and accept the values that you know
underlie citizenship and that's a
legitimate worry as well so people that
you know object on those grounds I think
are not necessarily racist but they're
you know they're raising real concerns
and as a political strategy I think when
you deal with immigration you've got to
disaggregate and and separate the the
real racists and xenophobes from people
that worry about these other categories
of issues where you can actually adjust
policy to meet them halfway right so
actually so this is this this problem I
have I mean I think that every day
Donald Trump says like a hundred really
offensive and obnoxious things but every
hundred thing that comes out of his
mouth is actually correct and one of
them for example is is that that
country's ought to be able to control
their borders you know I don't think you
can have a democracy if you can't
actually determine who the demos is who
the people are and that means you know
it did you need to exert some kind of
sovereign control over who comes into
the country who's a citizen and that
sort of thing I don't think you know
making that assertion makes you a racist
and I think that you know kind of
understanding that you can actually peel
away a certain amount of this populist
anger if you you know if you try to
disaggregate and then see what concerns
are more legitimate than others I think
that would go some way to you know
actually governing in over this space
where things are you know currently as
polarized as I guess that gets the heart
of activism because the question is how
many of those grievances are legitimate
if you take what happened with the
brexit referendum the leave campaign
and incredibly hard on immigration and
the remain campaign didn't campaign on
immigration at all so the immigration
argument went by default to leave which
was essentially immigration is a bad
thing it's out of control
was presented as as at a free-for-all
there's no such thing no one was making
the argument for the necessities of
liberation for example the National
Health Service depends hugely on
immigration in this country so the
question that this begs is how much the
Liberals have to as it were appease that
feeling and how much do they have to
fight back against it's actually
immigration is really important you know
imagine you're the society that you live
in and all the benefits it has without
immigration well I think that you know
you have to engage in that debate and
and you know actually make moral
arguments about what sorts of policies
are illegitimate and which ones are
actually reasonable so there's an
economic argument in favor of the NHS
you know and the need for immigrants
there's also an argument about you know
the rate of cultural change and what you
know is an acceptable rate I think
that's something you can have a you know
a rational deliberation over so I mean I
guess this is my feeling that it was a
big mistake for the remainders to think
about this just in economic terms they
simply were not perceiving what was
bothering people on the other side
because they were cosmopolitan and
educated and benefited from all of this
movement of people and I do think that
you know I I'm I'm on I'm fundamentally
on that side I would have voted to
remain if I had been a British citizen
but I do think that you need to a little
bit sympathetically understand what's
motivating people on the other side if
you are going to you know actually try
to diffuse some of you know some of that
anger reverses it is the whole question
of measures and and how to
germinating nurture this sense of
national identity you mentioned national
service presumably education plays a big
part in it yes would you I mean how
would how would you make this these
ideas into a curriculum how would that
be done yeah so the degree of ignorance
of I don't know what the situation is
here but I wouldn't be surprised if it's
different but in the United States they
do surveys of high school graduates and
the amount that they don't know about
their own political system is really
shocking you know that only like thirty
percent of them can name one right in
the Bill of Rights you know a very small
minority of them can name what the three
branches of government are you know this
sort of thing and so I think that you
know teaching people about their own
democratic institutions is you know
something that needs to be rien
and this is actually where
multiculturalism has played I think a
negative role because you can't really
understand the origins of these
democratic institutions unless you know
a little bit about the history of your
country and then the other kinds of
traditions that you know stand behind
them and they're all Western traditions
I mean that's the way we evolved to the
point we are now but teaching that you
know that particular set of historical
facts you know has in a sense been you
know D legitimated and so it is you know
it is a little bit of an uphill slog to
try to re-inject a sense of you know how
we got to the place we are back into a
school curriculum maybe people will be
persuaded of the necessity when they see
that the threat is not coming from you
know the identitarian of the left that
say that history is just a history of
racism patriarchy but by identitarian of
the right that one a you know in a sense
capture that history and you know and
use it to drag the country back into a
more you know ethnic understanding of
because one thing identity groups are
fantastically good at is providing
people with stories and narratives that
explain who they are where they've come
from or where they're going and what's
interesting and I think implicit in in
what you're saying is that the national
community has got very bad at that yes
that the story of nationhood has been or
more or less lost it so this is delicate
terrain for 30-odd because because the
gap between patriotism and nationalism
is always you know hotly contested but
is it I mean starting where we're
starting rather than where we'd like to
start i think liberals often start where
they'd like to start running where they
are what what would be the steps that
you could take to to reassert that
without sounding fantastically
old-fashioned well you know like I said
given that we're kind of in a defensive
crouch right now maybe just being a
little bit old-fashioned wouldn't be so
wouldn't be so bad you know saying that
actually we do have this Civic
understanding of you know of our
identity I do think that you have to
honestly craft these stories so again
another little anecdote when so
Thanksgiving is a big American holiday
it's actually my favorite holiday
because it's you know it's something
celebrated really by all Americans as a
celebration of their freedom in a
certain sense so I remember when my
daughter was in grade school they you
know had a Thanksgiving pageant and so
for Hofstra well what did you learn
about Thanksgiving and she said well I
learned that all the Indians were killed
and I said you know that's an
interesting you know conclusion and so
that's not quite the that's not quite
the right narrative you know that I
would construct so it does seem to me
that it's completely possible to tell
tell the story of the evolution of any
of our modern democracies without
whitewashing any of the
and the racism and the patriarchy and
all of those things that did you know in
fact and and that's what I've tried to
do in my own writing so you know if you
look at my last couple of books about
the evolution of institutions I talked
about colonialism and I you know talked
about these highly unjust you know
hierarchical systems but it does seem to
me you can also tell a progressive story
about how as a result of you know
political struggle stretching over
generations you know you are you are you
know eventually able to overcome a lot
of those prejudices and you know in
Justices you're never going to get there
to a perfectly just society but you know
it is possible to tell a positive story
that you know should resonate with
people and in fact I think the people
that it resonates the most with there
are actually recent immigrants that you
know they come from societies that they
know are really really defective and
they don't want to move to you know
Britain or the United States because
it's the home of racism and patriarchy
they you know they actually think that
there's something valuable in the kinds
of freedoms that have evolved in these
sorts of societies because an
interesting minor parable of this
recently was as I'm sure you know
astronaut scott kelly during the Brett
Kavanaugh hearings made the great error
of quoting Churchill on Twitter which
doing anything on Twitter can be an
error and was subject to a kind of
massive online attack and came out and
said he was terribly sorry to upset
everyone and he would go and reeducate
himself on Churchill mr. this then ran
which was odd because he's a man who did
for space missions and serviced the
Hubble telescope which you'd think he
would be able to stand up to a twitter
mole but apparently not it's actually a
measure of how alarming being subject to
a Twitter attack could be there is a
problem isn't there to stick with the
historical question when it is no longer
possible to quote Churchill without
becoming the subject of a kind of
digital frenzy
yeah I mean maybe that's something we
just have to you know learn about and
not get intimidated by and I think
that's the role of political leadership
is to actually not be intimidated by
Twitter mobs you know maybe that's you
know the kind of leadership that is
necessary but really hasn't been
forthcoming from a lot of people so
we'll have to see I mean like in the
United States you have you know the
president of one University that's
actually stood up for real academic
freedom you know at the University of
Chicago and the Twitter mobs didn't get
him you know so I think it's possible is
there in you mentioned not being
intimidated very interesting because
you'll throughout your your career
you've always stood up for enlightenment
values and I think sometimes is a
presumption that enlightenment values
are always in some sense permissive you
know they're about the Liberty to do
stuff but actually I think if I'm
reading your work correctly you you also
play a high place high value on duties
yes and upon the duty to be a citizen in
other words to go back to Franklin's
famous remark about what manner of
government have you bequeath this dog
Franklin are a public madam if you can
keep it that you are very much of the
view that democracy is not a free ride
yes I am NOT a libertarian you know I
don't think the end of government is
just to let people do whatever the hell
they want I think that you know in a
sense I mean it's a more classical
Republican understanding of political
community where you actually want to
cultivate public spirited people you
want to cultivate citizens that are
informed knowledgeable able to
deliberate able to you know come to
common decisions because that's what it
means to have self-government you know
that's that's what self-government is
and so I don't think that the you know
the state can be neutral between people
that you know don't care about politics
and don't pay attention and and simply
delegate that to others and those that
are much more actively involved so
that's why I like national service I was
in
viewed by you no reason magazine which
is a libertarian magazine I didn't like
my book but you know I I really think
that especially you know when you have
this kind of diversity if you don't do a
certain amount of social engineering
you're not actually going to solve some
of those problems of creating community
because it does have to be engineered to
some extent do you think political you
mentioned political leadership do you
think political leaders have become too
frightened of making demands or citizens
because you look at the the great
political oratory of the past whether
it's Lincoln Mandela or Churchill or
Harvey Milk or Martin Luther King all
these people made demands of the people
they address they didn't simply make
them retail offers that's right I mean
it's easier to do when you're under you
know external threat it's easier to do
when you fear you know the collapse of
your society from a financial crisis or
you know some other event and it could
be that you're not going to get that
kind of leadership until this kind of
external shock suddenly appears but that
is one of the functions of leadership to
take advantage of situations that open
up political space that you didn't think
existed previously last question I want
to ask Francis is do you what do you
think the the next 10 years hold for
this particular field of identity
politics I mean is it is it going to get
worse before it gets better or what no
I'm hoping everybody will read and buy
my book and then they'll be convinced
that we need national identity ml know
but but no but seriously you know I
think that in the the same New York
Times Book Review where my book was
reviewed there are actually four books
on identity all of which were critical
of the way that identity politics had
evolved in the United States and I
thought it was actually a sign of the
times that the New York Times which has
been a Tribune in a certain sense of a
certain kind of identity politics was
you know was willing to do this and so
that's why I think that's what
happens in a democracy you know you have
to try to persuade people and part of
that work you know has to be done by you
know people that make arguments and put
them out in front of people because you
know over time that's the way I mean
that's how the conservative revolution
happened you know you had a lot of
theorists like Milton Friedman and so
forth that stood behind people like
Reagan and Thatcher that gave you know
more intellectual weight and so I think
we need a you know a little bit more of
that kind of discussion when it comes to
these sorts of issues now I'd like to
take some questions from the floor what
I'd like to do if I may is take groups
of three if we could maybe raise the
lights up a little so I can see people
or not possible okay I shall do my best
if you want to stick your hands up very
is that question just here so we'll take
three at a time in my lifetime I've seen
we've moved from a class system to a
meritocracy that meritocracy favors
professional and academic success and
it's easy and people have risen to
succeeded very well in global
globalization they've benefited from
that enormous Lee do you think that has
led to fostering identity politics
because it's easier to break people up
by allowing them to indulge in identity
politics and in a way the clever people
can push the stupid people around
because they're busy fighting with each
other and then the clever people can
tell them what to do and they wield a
kind of global overlay thanks Chris from
the Urban Land Institute we spoke about
the nation-state as being the unit that
deploys power and it's really difficult
to get identities to work through
body politics that aren't the nation
state are they're all turned territorial
alternatives to that for example urban
regions versus the nation okay and one
more there thanks so I had a question
going back to the 2016 election the
brexit and Trump might there be a silver
lining in both in the sense of a the
debate we're having be in brexit the
opportunity to redefine our national
sense of national glue or those positive
sides of nationalism that you alluded to
and certainly Trump if he's nothing else
he's a politician who can stand up to a
Twitter storm so a question on the the
implications of the movement from class
system to meritocracy the the merits of
looking through the prism of urban
regions and then the silver lining of
2016 yeah so I've never actually heard
the suggestion before that meritocracy
actually promotes identity politics I
would have thought that the two of them
are actually a little bit at odds
because the biggest pushback in many
cases against identity politics is that
you're trying to promote somebody just
because they're black or just because
they're female you know they're members
of these big groups but individually
they actually may not you know be the
best person for the job you know there's
a lot of conflicts you know like Harvard
University right now is being sued
because the argument is they're
discriminating against Asians we're and
a pure meritocracy basis you know
there'd be a lot of them so I'll have to
think about I'll have to think about
your suggestion because I think that
right now I see more of a conflict
between the principle of meritocracy and
the principle of identity by the way I'm
not simply on on the side of meritocracy
I mean I do think that actually people
have advantages and conceit succeed in a
meritocratic competition you know
because they are members of groups are
born into the right family they're
brought
Bannen to the right social class of the
right neighborhood so it's not
unreasonable that you know there should
be compensation that's also based on
those categories but it really does bump
up against a principle that as
individuals you know we should be judged
in terms of regions yeah of course so
one of the big problems I think in these
very large units that we call nations is
that they actually have a tremendous
amount of you know regional variation
they're really not uniform and I think
that one of the moves towards defense
realization federalism autonomy for
regions has been to recognize that
you're not simply going to homogenize
people over you know a very large area
the United States would be completely
uncover noble if it were a unitary
centralized state and so I do think that
there's an opportunity to work at
smaller scales by by doing that the
third one was the silver lining of mm oh
yeah no absolutely so I think that 2016
did several things that were good so
first of all it's not as if these
populace are just ignorant
you know fools that don't understand how
good things have been the elites in
America and Europe have really screwed
up in big ways no in America you had the
Iraq war and then the financial crisis
in Europe you had the euro crisis and
the the migrant crisis all of these are
elite generated screw-ups in policy
they're the result of elite policies so
it's not unreasonable that ordinary
people are upset about that and
furthermore you know as I was saying in
terms of you know the views of a lot of
these downwardly mobile white
working-class people that has become all
of a sudden a salient issue because of
the you know of those elections and it
does represent you know in in a way real
democratic participation the other good
effect has had is on the other side you
know the populist have been so extreme
that they've generated
a lot of mobilization on the left and so
my students you know you know in the
last midterm election at Stanford only
17% of students actually voted in the
election I guarantee you this election
the numbers gonna be a lot higher
because I think they've gotten a good
civics lesson that if you don't pay
attention you don't vote look at what
you end up with lady in the white
pearlitic thank you thank you very much
for interesting conversation today
you've talked about Georgian politics
and there are presidential elections
coming up now in Georgia so I wanted to
ask you how would you compare Georgia's
economic social and political
development under the leadership of 3rd
presidents actually with the current
government under the leadership of the
oligarch who doesn't officially hold a
political position in Georgian politics
thank you and then just here that's it
yeah yep and I'm interested in like the
this narrative of progression that you
talked about for the nation-state and
you mentioned the importance of like
having a narrative but in terms of
actually putting that into practice
isn't it then necessary for things like
political correctness to not be sort of
dismissed as sort of unnecessary
oversensitivity
because political correctness began like
you mentioned in the 60s from groups
that were once marginalized standing up
for sort of their right for to be
represented and to have social justice
and isn't that what we're seeing today
with more groups like for example
transgender that are now asking for the
rights that they deserve in society and
and if we kind of dismissed that then we
fall in to continuing for the narrative
to be shaped by the sort of old white
rich men that have shaped the narrative
of democracy and of liberalism from the
beginning okay hi I think in your
earlier book the end of history you
postulated that the liberal democracy is
the
ultimate form of government for mankind
and you know like after something around
25 years my question is or I'm curious
you know given the situation we are in
due to the politicians like put in Trump
Modi etc do you still hold that belief
that you know like eventually liberal
democracy is going to be the ultimate
you know life form of government across
the world so Georgia yeah PC the case
for yeah and then reflections on the end
of history yeah well this time next week
I'm gonna be in Tbilisi so maybe after I
get back we can have a discussion of I
mean I do have opinions about you know
the current political situation you
described and maybe we can talk about
that offline I'm not sure that you know
I mean that's that's a quite a specific
political thing but yeah I don't like
the current oligarch I I think that
things could be better in Georgian
politics now the question about you know
the progressive history I do not in any
way advocate airbrushing or glossing
over actual and justices that exist in
current society nor do I think that it's
wrong for you know any marginalized
group to push against the specific forms
of injustice that it suffers I'm just
saying that you need to balance that
against you know first of all the need
for a more integrative larger identity
that gives people a common sense of
belonging within a broader Democratic
community and you also have to give them
a certain sense of a source of pride and
that's why I was just saying that if
your entire historical negative
narrative is about the in justices that
the system is produced they're not going
to have that sense that change is
possible that we can make progress over
time and that you know as a democratic
community we're going to make things
better
so the question on the
have to back up a little bit about what
the end of history was really about
right it wasn't necessarily a prediction
that everybody was going to turn
Democratic in the near future history
you know a synonym for the way that I
was using the word history could be the
word modernization or it could be the
word development I think those are
contemporary terms that we would use in
their place
and the question that I was posing was
what is the direction in which
modernization is pointing
so the Marxist said it was pointing
towards communism and I was observing
back in 1989 originally that it didn't
look like that was going to happen and I
still think that you know of the
different forms of human social
organization I don't see one that is
likely to be more successful than some
form of liberal democracy tied to some
form of market economy if someone can
show me an alternative that seems
systematically better you know maybe
it's China you know in another 30 years
of China is much richer more powerful
and completely stable compared to
Western democracies then I would concede
that maybe there is an alternative is
just wrong in my assessment of the
directionality of history but at the
moment I think it's an open question
good times two more questions is back my
question is very short what will happen
to Iran someone's got the microphone now
yeah hi
thank you um so you're very clear that
people like Donald Trump in the far
right or a threat to the poor democracy
I need to start to analysis based on
some of their assumptions such as the
problem started in the 60s and that the
nation-state is the core sort of actor I
was wondering how how can we counter the
narrative of the far-right if we yield
ground and certain of these issues okay
so Iran and I were yielding too much too
far right and then we'll have to close
down I don't know what's gonna happen in
your own
I mean eggs as brief and answers the
question and and then what about the so
you have to understand I mean he's good
you got to give it you have to
understand that my book is not about I
didn't start you know by blaming the
left for the current situation when I
was you know the whole thrust of the
book is that the biggest threat we have
right now is this new right led by
people like Donald Trump and Viktor
Orban and the like and I'm just trying
to give an account of how we got there
and if you talk about how our modern
concept of identity and identity
politics evolved I think it does just as
a matter of empirical historical fact it
does begin there that does not mean that
I am somehow morally holding you know
the that kind of left-wing identity
politics responsible for the current
problem that we're in I think that it
was legitimate I think that you know
these were social justice issues that
were you know absolutely necessary to
resolve and so I somehow this idea that
I'm blaming the left for Donald Trump
has gotten out and it's just not you
know it's not the argument that's in the
book well last time sleeved they're from
a crave 30 more seconds of your time
many more riches are Hawaii with the how
to Academy
Michael Lewis in conversation with Owen
Jones Peter Frank founding conversations
are Kayla do come along to either or
both of them and Francis will very
kindly be signing copies of his book I
do urge you to buy a copy it's fantastic
please join me in thanking the maestro
himself
[Applause]
[Music]